# Mutual TLS

Mutual authentication or two-way authentication refers to two parties
authenticating each other at the same time, being a default mode of
authentication in some protocols (IKE, SSH) and optional in others (TLS).

With Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh, Mutual TLS can be used without either
application/service knowing that it is happening. The TLS is handled entirely
by the service mesh infrastructure and between the two sidecar proxies.

## What we will learn in this module
This module will provide instruction on how to enable Mutual TLS to secure
communication between services in the mesh.

Before continuing, make sure you only have the `customer` _Virtual Service_
and the `recommendation` _Destination Rule_:

[source,bash,role#"execute-1"]
----
oc get virtualservice,destinationrule -n %username%-tutorial
----

You will see something like:

[source,bash]
----
NAME                                          GATEWAYS             HOSTS   AGE
virtualservice.networking.istio.io/customer   [customer-gateway]   [*]     60s

NAME                                                 HOST             AGE
destinationrule.networking.istio.io/recommendation   recommendation   38m
----

If you had accidentally deleted the `DestinationRule`, you can recreate it with the following command:

[source,bash,role#"execute-1"]
----
oc apply -f /opt/app-root/workshop/content/src/istiofiles/destination-rule.yml -n %username%-tutorial
----

[#enablemtls]
## Enabling Mutual TLS
For this example, we will take advantage of a pod that is not under the
control of the service mesh.

Start by generating load in the background:

[source,bash,role#"execute-2"]
----
bash /opt/app-root/workshop/content/scripts/curl_customer_preference_quiet.sh
----

Examine the traffic between the "external" pod and the customer services and
the preference service by running the load once in the upper terminal:

[source,bash,role#"execute-1"]
----
bash /opt/app-root/workshop/content/scripts/curl_customer_preference.sh
----

_Kiali’s Graph_

Within the Kiali UI select the Graph option from the left hand navigation and
then choose:

* Namespace: %username%-tutorial
* Versioned app graph
* Requests percentage
* Last 1m
* Every 10s
* Security checked under display

You will notice that there are requests originating from "unknown". That is
the pod inside which the `curl` command was executed by the script. The
script also executes a `curl` from within the `customer` pod.

image::images/mtls_initial.png[]

Now configure preference to use mutual TLS policy.

[source,bash,role#"execute-1"]
----
oc apply -f /opt/app-root/workshop/content/src/istiofiles/authentication-enable-tls.yml -n %username%-tutorial
----

The Policy just created can be seen below:

[source, yaml]
----
apiVersion: "authentication.istio.io/v1alpha1"
kind: "Policy"
metadata:
  name: "preference-mutualtls"
spec:
  targets:
  - name: preference
  peers:
  - mtls:
      mode: STRICT
----

*Note:* It may take some time before the mesh begins to enforce the policy. If
you do not see the expected behaviors, wait a few more moments and then try
again. Patience is a virtue.

Try running the load once in the upper terminal:

[source,bash,role#"execute-1"]
----
bash /opt/app-root/workshop/content/scripts/curl_customer_preference.sh
----

This time, we can see that the curl from the curl pod failed with exit code
56. This is because preference is now requiring encrypted communication over
mutual TLS (`STRICT`) via a _policy enforcement_, but the curl pod (which is
outside the mesh) is not attempting to use mututal TLS. While the customer
pod is inside the mesh, there are no rules that tell the customer pod's proxy
to attempt to use mutual TLS. Thus, the proxy simply blocks the connection
attempt completely (503 Service Unavailable) because the _policy_ says we
should be using mutual TLS (and we're not).

Now, create a destination rule to make communication to customer use mutual
TLS and run the curl again:

[source,bash,role#"execute-1"]
----
oc apply -f /opt/app-root/workshop/content/src/istiofiles/destination-rule-tls.yml -n %username%-tutorial
----

The yaml just created can be seen below:

[source, yaml]
----
apiVersion: "networking.istio.io/v1alpha3"
kind: "DestinationRule"
metadata:
  name: "preference-destination-rule"
spec:
  host: "preference"
  trafficPolicy:
    tls:
      mode: ISTIO_MUTUAL
----

And now try running the load again in the upper terminal:

[source,bash,role#"execute-1"]
----
bash /opt/app-root/workshop/content/scripts/curl_customer_preference.sh
----

The curl pod will again show exit code 56 because it is still being prevented
from communicating with the mesh.

Because the `DestinationRule` for the `preference` host now specifies that
the traffic policy should be `ISTIO_MUTUAL` (TLS), the traffic exiting the
customer pod (with a destination of `preference`) gets mutual TLS enabled.
Since the preference target has the `STRICT` enforcement of mutual TLS, and
we are using mutual TLS, the traffic is allowed.

Looking at the Kiali graph, a lock is now present on the graph of
communication between customer and preference, indicating that this
communication is secured via mTLS.

image::images/mtls_policy_and_rule.png[]

Lastly, note that the `curl` command that was executed was showing headers
indicating `HTTP`, but we also know the communication was enforced with
mutual TLS. What happened? Envoy (the sidecar proxy) is intercepting any
communication leaving the pod, and Envoy is enforcing the TLS connection
between the source and the destination. In this way the services don't even
have to be TLS aware themselves! The mesh can "give" us TLS even if our
services can't.

Lastly, you'll notice that the Kiali graph no longer shows the traffic coming
from "unknown". This is because the traffic is dropped before leaving the
pod, so it never gets counted by the metrics.

[#mtlsmigration]
## mTLS migration

Mutual TLS in OpenShift Service Mesh provides the ability to migrate to mTLS
gradually rather than forcing all services to migrate to mTLS at once. Lets
try that now.

First, delete the policy we created above.

[source,bash,role#"execute-1"]
----
oc delete policy -n %username%-tutorial preference-mutualtls
----

Now create a policy using permissive mode.

[source,bash,role#"execute-1"]
----
oc apply -f /opt/app-root/workshop/content/src/istiofiles/policy-permissive-tls.yml -n %username%-tutorial
----

The contents of the file are displayed below:

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: "authentication.istio.io/v1alpha1"
kind: "Policy"
metadata:
  name: "preference-mutualtls"
spec:
  targets:
  - name: preference
  peers:
  - mtls:
      mode: PERMISSIVE
----

If we try our curl commands again, we notice that this time they both pass:

[source,bash,role#"execute-1"]
----
bash /opt/app-root/workshop/content/scripts/curl_customer_preference.sh
----

In Kiali, we can see that the lock is still shown, indicating the presence of
mTLS. We see the curl pod labeled as unknown since it's not part of the mesh,
and we can see that both customer and curl are succesful. In this way, mutual
TLS is used when rules suggest it should be used, but, if no matching rule
exists, non-mTLS is _permitted_.

image::images/mtls_permissive.png[]

*NOTE*: You may see errors in the communication between the `customer` and
`preference` services. This is due to a known issue being tracked here:
https://issues.jboss.org/browse/MAISTRA-1000

[#cleanup]
## Cleanup

To cleanup, delete both the policy and destination rule that we created.

[source,bash,role#"execute-1"]
----
oc delete policy -n %username%-tutorial preference-mutualtls
oc delete destinationrule -n %username%-tutorial preference-destination-rule
----

You can also stop the load generating script by clicking the lower terminal
and pressing control+c.
