- Let's load the text formatted dataset of 100 classic novels from the Gutenberg's collection into our Elasticsearch service.

> Note : Hang Tight ! The data ingestion could take a few minutes.

`oc exec -it e-library-backend-api -n e-library -- curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/load_data`{{execute}}

> Here the ingested data is getting stored on Elasticsearch shards which are in-turn using ODF PVC for persistence.

- As soon as the data is ingested, Elasticsearch will index that and make it search-able.
- Grab the frontend URL and open that in your web-browser to search for any random words.
- _URL_ http://frontend-e-library.[[HOST_SUBDOMAIN]]-80-[[KATACODA_HOST]].environments.katacoda.com

`oc get route frontend -n e-library`{{execute}}

- Elasticsearch real-time search capabilities, instantly searches a large dataset. Thus making it a popular choice for logging,metrics,full-text search, etc. use cases.

## Final Thoughts

Elasticsearch offers replication at per index level to provide some data resilience. Additional data resilience can be provided by deploying Elasticsearch on top of a reliable storage service layer such as OpenShift Container Storage which offers further resilience capabilities. This additional data resilience can enhance Elasticsearch service availability during broader infrastructure failure scenarios. Because of limited system resources available in this lab environment, we could not demonstrate the enhanced resiliency capabilities of Elasticsearch when deployed on OpenShift Container Storage, but you have got the idea :)

Happy Persistency \o
